Here are some notes and links to go through as homework in preparation
for SIV. Click on blue underlined links for videos/details on a topic

General Rule \#1: Pilots that do this homework have a better time,
perform better, learn more, are safer and get more flights in during the
SIV.  Those that don’t do the homework generally slow themselves and
everyone else down. 

General Rule \#2: Don’t “lolly-gag” at the beach. Get ready for tow or
help others do so. If a pilot In line is not ready for tow when the boat
arrives, and someone else is, we will encourage them to jump ahead and
get more tows in the day.

​1. SAFETY.

Ridge Meadows Hospital

11666 Laity St

Maple Ridge

​(604) 463-4111

First Aid Kit and tree rescue on beach next to simulator.

​2. MISSION OBJECTIVES.  Please don't try to impress with "radical"
moves during SIV.  Please don't try to do more than is asked. Bad
launches; going off tow route into a lock-out attitude; winding a
manoeuvre up into a cascade; riser twists, cravat, cocoon; reserve
throws;  and not making it back to the beach: are all unnecessarily
dangerous.

Quick response times to radio commands and consistent, predictable and
smooth deliberate entries and exits to SIV moves are preferable.  If
pilots are performing well, our goal should be to have: perfect
launches; zero lock outs requiring no pre-mature cut-aways; good tow
tracks for max altitude; clean deliberate SIV moves that do not cascade;
a progression of SIV moves; and pilots bettering their beach landing
accuracy throughout.

The goal of SIV is to teach you how to predict, prevent, identify, and
recover from bad flight attitudes to normal flight.  In decreasing order
of preference! If you can correctly predict what action will lead to a
bad flight attitude, you will likely never get into a bad flight
attitude.  SIV will also give some idea of altitudes required for
recovery, and thus, reserve deployment situations.

This course is about having an extra tool set to deal with an emergency,
rare occasion.  Not about goofing off and routinely putting yourself
into extreme situations over hard ground.

This is NOT an Acro course, and be advised you need a minimum of 5 years
experience, 1000 air hours and 10 or more successful SIVs before you can
start to contemplate acro.  Even then, any acro should always be over a
lake, under instruction, with rescue boat on standby.

​3. RADIOS.

Two fully charged LARGE MOTOROLA FRS (no mini-ones or other brands: they
are unreliable!) and CHARGERSs. Also zip lock bags and duct tape so we
can help try prevent electronics from damage should you go in lake.
 YOUR ABILITY TO HEAR COMMANDS DURING SIV IS LIFE CRITICAL.  It is 100%
your responsibility to ensure you only use the specified type radios and
that you have two that you check the batteries before each launch and
bring back-up hard batteries and keep the volumes at maximum.   We will
do some basic manoeuvres and test your hearing before the faster and
more noisier  ones.  If at any point, you are in a manoeuvre for an
excessive period, and don't hear anything: try twisting your head
towards the radio to confirm, and if in doubt about altitude, exit the
manoeuvre per briefing instructions.

​4. RESERVES.

If you hit water hard enough it behaves like concrete.  So imagine that
the lake is instead a giant parking lot, where the main advantage is
that if you throw your reserve, you won't end up lost in the forest
hanging from a tree.  Your Reserve must be freshly repacked for SIV as
if the manoeuvre goes astray and is nonrecoverable, you will need to use
your reserve.      

​5.  HOW TO DEPLOY: RESERVE DEPLOY MANTRA.

​1. RELEASE the brake toggles. Your focus needs to be 100% on your
reserve now, and

hands unobstructed, so you can act.

​2. LOOK for the reserve handle. Paragliding harnesses have a number of
adjustment straps that can easily be confused with the parachute
deployment handle in an emergency situation.

​3. GRAB the reserve handle.

​4. PUNCH the handle up and forward, hard and to full extension, like
your life depended on it. The reserve in its deploy bag will be hanging
below the handle like a suitcase you are holding forward at arms length.

​6. THROW the deployment bag towards clear air, usually behind you.
Throw the bag hard, as if your life depended on it, because it very well
could. The extension of the bridal needs to occur hard enough to pop the
stow on the deploy bag.

​7. YANK on the riser. This will help clear the stow on the deploy bag
if it is locked, and also to spread the suspension lines and open the
air channel if your canopy has not yet inflated.

​8. (REEL-IN if necessary, if your deploy bag remains closed, pull your
parachute back in with yanking movements and repeat steps 6-7 until
parachute opens.)

​9. LOW = PLF if altitude is low, immediately prepare for PLF and
impact.

​10. HIGH = DISABLE, COMPENSATE & PLF if altitude is high, identify if
your paraglider is

down-planning or competing with your reserve. If it is, go hand over
hand on rear risers and lines until you have fabric in hands, compress
in a ball between your legs. Assess wind drift for impact location. If
drifting towards power lines, “slip” your reserve away by pulling on a
riser/line away from the hazard and releasing once clear. If over water,
unclip from harness and flare, jumping clear of gear, ready yourself for
possible entanglement and need of hook knife. Prepare for PLF and
impact.

​6. WATER LANDINGS.

If you think you are going to descend into water, it is important to
know that the lines and parachute can easily tie you up under water.

To help prevent this, disconnect your leg and chest straps in
preparation for jumping free of the harness, just before you impact the
water. Sit on the edge of your seat board (and if the paraglider is
still overhead controllable, flare hard so that the paraglider stalls
clean away and behind you) and lurch forward into the water, just before
impact.

Depth perception can be very deceptive over water, so keep your eyes on
the horizon and look for concrete clues to determine your altitude over
water. Many skydivers have gotten seriously hurt or killed jumping into
the water when they were too high.

Always have your hook knife ready in your hand. If you find yourself
under water with your canopy overhead, try not to make any thrashing
movements, remain calm with gentle, deliberate motions. Remember, there
should be an air pocket trapped underneath and within the paraglider.
Stay under water and swim away from your impact area.

​7. SIV SITUATIONS REQUIRING RESERVE DEPLOYMENT (we will call "deploy,
deploy, deploy your reserve").

If the pilot is cocooned in the paraglider fabric or is entangled in
major lines, this is a definite reserve throw scenario regardless of
altitude. Try "swimming" out of your canopy, pushing fabric away from
yourself, and throwing into clear air away from canopy.

Otherwise, a decision to deploy your reserve is based on three
fundamental considerations: altitude, pilot focus, and glider attitude.

If you are thousands of feet above the ground (altitude); and you
sustain a asymmetric deflation leading to a cravat and subsequent spiral
dive (glider attitude); but the g forces are not yet overwhelming so you
are able to calmly respond (pilot focus): continue to try to fix the
problems as per Simulation of Flight Incidents (SIV) training.

If at any point the pilot focus decreases, you start to panic, the
g-forces start to prevent your ability to move, or your field of vision
narrows with black on the edges: you are dangerously close to falling
unconscious: deploy your reserve regardless of altitude.

Many paraglider pilots use a critical altitude below which they will no
longer attempt to correct the situation and automatically go for their
reserve parachute. For our SIV training this will be 500ft.

Riser twists with trapped brakes resulting in a cascade of spins, deep
stall and stalls is a reserve throw situation below 500 ft.

A cravated spiraling glider will not recover within 500 ft – reserve
should be thrown.

Any deep spiral below 500 ft that the pilot has lost control of should
result in a reserve toss.

In general, if the glider is diving at high speed and still violently
out of control below 500 ft, and the pilot sees more ground than sky,
the reserve should be thrown.

If you've lost control of a manoeuvre below 500ft, and are unable to
hear us on the radio,  deploy your reserve.

​8. WHEN NOT TO THROW.

Asymmetric deflations less than 50%, full frontals and other incidents
where the glider attitude remains overhead, which a pilot should be able
to recover from with less than 500 ft, given that they have taken SIV
training.

The following Bad Glider Attitudes result in the following descent
rates, and ETAs to impact from 500 ft above ground level (AGL):

• Deepest Spiral Dive – 20 m/s – ex. cravated spiral – ETA 7.6 seconds -
fatality most probable.

• Full Stall/Deep Stall/Spin cascade – 10 m/s or more – ex. riser twists
with locked brakes –glider cascading from deep stall to stall, possibly
spinning, with surges – ETA 15.2 seconds – serious injuries most
probable, fatality possible.

• Spin\* stable & overhead, Deep Stall\* – 6 m/s or more descent rate –
ex. over braked glider or too much asymmetric brake – ETA 25.4 seconds –
injuries probable, if no PLF.

• Asymmetric deflation\* 50% stable & overhead, Full frontal\* deflation
- 4 m/s or more descent rate – unchecked turbulence causes deflation -
ETA 38 seconds – injuries possible if no PLF.

\* Note spins, deep stall, asymmetric deflations, frontal will only
yield the lower descent rates if the dive is checked by the pilot, and
the glider remains stable and overhead. Otherwise, higher descent rates,
more in line with spiral dividing, will ensue, and serious injuries and
even death can occur. Simulation of Flight Incidents (SFI/SIV) Training
 is essential so that pilots can maintain stability for these incidents,
recover from them and minimize the need to throw below the 500 ft
critical altitude. If loss of control occurs, or pilot has any doubt,
reserve should still be thrown.

​9. TOWING.

A few must haves for towing:

- hydraulic payout winch so that the tow tension adjusts to demand

- a weak link on tow line so if pilot approaches lock out, link breaks
and pilot is off tow

- unbreakable glasses on pilots as if weak link breaks, bridal lines etc
can become a whip up into your eyes

- a quick release bridal for the pilot so they can cut a way at any
time.

- a hook knife in case above don’t work or you have lines around you

- life vests in case you hit the water unconscious

- radios and clear body/hand signals between pilot and tow operator

- freshly packed reserve parachutes,  back protectors, gloves,  helmets
on all pilots

- a bail out plan and landing approach for cut-ways from tow

 

​10. TOW ROTATION.

 Really important pilots take their place in the queue and help each
other set up for max efficiency and flights for the day.  Good teamwork
gets up to 4 tows/hr:

 

​1. one assistant in boat

​2. one assistant holding tow line and drogue chute

​3. pilot on tow

​4. pilot in queue getting ready for tow

 

​11. TOW BRIDAL USE. Study this Carefully.

[https://img1.wsimg.com/blobby/go/270ff1af-1e09-4cb6-a954-9c861866a7f6/downloads/1c39n0cov\_230969.pdf?ver=1585428948443](q=https://img1.wsimg.com/blobby/go/270ff1af-1e09-4cb6-a954-9c861866a7f6/downloads/1c39n0cov_230969.pdf?ver%3D1585428948443&sa=D&ust=1599081585486000&usg=AOvVaw0QjejhSJI3a-cyfi54iMdn)

​12. TOWING.

​1. Ready in forward launch position.  Bow to indicate your readiness.
Lean back bracing for onset of pressure.

​2. Jet boat gets going, wait for tension in line to get pronounced.

​3. Tow line spotter drops towline and clears

​4. Forward launch, but initially lean BACK resisting tow, run like
hell, bring arms up and around to prevent frontal, do not sit
prematurely, add a touch of brake if lingering close to ground once
airborne.  

​5. Critical to maintain flight path vertical, not turning toward beach
tree line or lake. Any escalating turn: cut-away with bridal quick
release before LOCK-OUT occurs. Then, if safe beach landing not
possible,  ditch into lake.  You may need to do this swiftly on your own
initiative. If instructor commands "cut-away" do so.

​6. Once clear and on good flight path can sit. It is harder to sit with
a life vest on. Important to loosen your shoulder straps and other
straps and adjust your harness during pre-flight to allow you to get in.

​7. Pay attention to flight path.  Look up at wing a lot as you need to
fly it actively all the time and it will behave slightly differently
than usual. You cannot allow your wing to yaw off course and it does so
easily.  So you need to fly your wing around the full course of tow and
it takes constant adjustment. If instructors command "cut-away"  do so.
 If you cut way when away from the beach and with some altitude, it
should be possible to immediately turn back to the beach and glide back.
If not, prepare for water landing as above, and boat will be on its way
to pick you up.

​8. Tow boat will do an oval course with long axis along lake.  You
should fly always on the outside of the oval on the straight legs and on
the outside of the oval  curved sections (5-10 degrees) to keep the tow
tension up. Let the boat lead the turn with you slightly slightly behind
in your turns.

​9. Do not freak out if you are getting jerking sensations or noise in
tow line, or if at altitude you are getting the tow line dropping at a
weird angle: that is normal.

 

​10. When boat has got you to to altitude (generally after one full oval
and once he is upwind of the beach again) you will hear the engine drop
As the boat stops and the winch operator will hit rewind to take some
slack out of the line...wait  a few seconds for some of the slack to be
taken up... then as line just starts to tighten...that is your signal to
cut-away.   We may also encourage you to do so if you haven't already
"cut-away".

​11. Once you cut away, the drogue chute and line will fall away.  If
for some reason it doesn't, try again and check bridal pin has released.
 If you are unable to cut away after several attempts, use your hook
knife to cut TOW BRIDAL ONLY.

​12. Once clear of drogue make a turn toward the center of the lake.  We
will watch for that.  We want to make sure you are sure you are well
over the lake, not the beach, before you start any manouvers.  So step
inside the lake if you must.  Then we will start coaching you through
moves.

​13. Staging.  Always get back into the best position for each new
manoeuvre.  That is over the lake, flying upwind parallel to the
shoreline, staying close to your LZ.        

​13. SIV PROGRESSIONS.

The most deadly scenarios in paragliding are: cocooned; riser twists;
cravat; deep spiral.    

We won't deliberately attempt to simulate these three directly.

Cocoon occurs when a pilot tumbles over their glider with insufficient
energy, so the lines go slack and pilot falls into canopy.

[Riser
twists](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3DC8MKfBVspzQ&sa=D&ust=1599081585492000&usg=AOvVaw3PeosfCfmVi4FKECg0Od2R) occur
when the wing spins more quickly than the pilot.  That is why pod
harnesses aren't great in turbulence: the pilot has a high polar moment
of inertia, splayed out, versus a more compact upright position (acro
harness), allowing him to spin quickly with the glider.  Twists often
lead to cascades: spin \> deepstall \> stall \> spin \> deep stall, and
any combination oscillating between these, especially if the pilots
brakes get trapped in a deep position, and thus, the glider can't surge
to restart normal flight. If it does surge after an aggravated deeps
stall or cascade, it often lurches to a deep spiral.

Cravat occurs if pilot doesn't check lines on launch, or during a large
scale asymmetric collapse, the pilot lets surge ahead, and has his body
weight fall towards, trapping a wing tip or more in the lines.  It can
also occur from any asymmetrically exited stall or spin.   A large
assymetric cravat leads to deep spiral dives.

The majority of poorly executed SIV moves lead to an asymmetric dive and
therefore spiral.

So in our SIV progression we will start almost immediately with spiral
to ensure you understand it, should it occur inadvertently after
mistakes during other movements.

We will custom tailor the course to your individual progression and
comfort level.

​1. [ Big
Ears](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3D7a8WYP-G20w&sa=D&ust=1599081585494000&usg=AOvVaw158ngg14Bzagut5eCZiwMe)

​2. [ Asymmetric Big
Ears](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3Dbhs1GMaUpY8&sa=D&ust=1599081585495000&usg=AOvVaw1xpWFepbH0uGqw7iBVfmeV).

 

​3. Gentle Spiral

4.[Deeper
Spiral](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3DhZTKqcK7l8Y&sa=D&ust=1599081585496000&usg=AOvVaw2eb7eDgRUrmcLp0uP9B2k6)

​5.
[Frontal](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3DJMJytOa1f4Y%26t%3D17s&sa=D&ust=1599081585497000&usg=AOvVaw2jVJQpLZk9mXYdt3G3hH76)

6.[ ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3DJMJytOa1f4Y%26t%3D17s&sa=D&ust=1599081585498000&usg=AOvVaw2HeFeoeYK3g66G3I-JhyCK)[Big
Frontal](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3DcGElf9BxQVE&sa=D&ust=1599081585499000&usg=AOvVaw1BERmbW2zMgt2N9boLQ3wp)

​7.
[Asymmetric](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3DXzuhaE8Q6aQ&sa=D&ust=1599081585500000&usg=AOvVaw3mvbo0ttY787dgklqcc-YF) 

​8. [Big
Asymmetric](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3DMfccCv25rdc&sa=D&ust=1599081585500000&usg=AOvVaw0D_wqXbRtQ17M4Sn9zL7Yl)

​9. [B-line
Stall](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3DKI8ZPW_x0Cc&sa=D&ust=1599081585501000&usg=AOvVaw0xWCfcg9_R1fAzJW12o4Vo)

10.[Full
Stall](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3D2WxyEas7Jyk&sa=D&ust=1599081585502000&usg=AOvVaw3xlxBZOJznmQBPan2KSS4H)

​11. Weight shift wing-over

12.[ ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3DZubfL1QiHhM&sa=D&ust=1599081585503000&usg=AOvVaw34LMC7s64XFvmLbs77kY_7)[Wing
over](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3DVJ8TQRxK0gw%26playnext%3D1%26list%3DPLA163009523269D01%26feature%3Dresults_main&sa=D&ust=1599081585503000&usg=AOvVaw12V_659BEOkjS22QqutPtB)

\*13. Spin from slow flight \> exit via full stall if excessive
oscillations

\*14.[ ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3Dwfgpuj9uwmk&sa=D&ust=1599081585504000&usg=AOvVaw0j-kUuKt1zcY41P6_KWTkZ)[Spin
from trim \> exit via full stall if excessive
oscillations](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3DNfIWa5whgTA&sa=D&ust=1599081585505000&usg=AOvVaw2oqxuuL_sidUe-3kL6Xb3H)

\*\*15. Deep stall \> exit via full stall if it starts to pitch back

\*\*16. Asymmetric Spiral

\*\*17. High bank wing-over

\* Requires basic pilot ability in 1-12 prior to attempting.  Not
achievable by all pilots in SIV\#1

\*\*Requires high level pilot proficiency in 1-15. Requires 300 air
hours minimum and several successive SIVs within a short time frame

   

The videos are for reference only, some techniques are not the ones we
want to use.  

​14. SEND us your MAKE/MODEL/SIZE OF YOUR PARAGLIDER/HARNESS/RESERVE.

As homework, goto the CEN and or LTF website and find and print the Test
report for your paraglider. Study it.  PRINT report for your wing and
bring with you to the Seminar. We will be doing real life CEN/LTF type
manoeuvres and you will be able to see how your experience compares with
the test results from test pilots.

​15. WATCH PERFORMANCE FLYING. By Jocky Sanderson. There is some thermal
and XC bits, but most importantly study and mentally rehearse the SIV
part.

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=10MxM7S5Qdg&list=PLYEMlgrSG8zBT7oDFMLGvS479ZLZSAUhb](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3D10MxM7S5Qdg%26list%3DPLYEMlgrSG8zBT7oDFMLGvS479ZLZSAUhb&sa=D&ust=1599081585508000&usg=AOvVaw1oiHmVoMTrFYo6Qqdakc3_) 
   

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=10MxM7S5Qdg&list=PLYEMlgrSG8zBT7oDFMLGvS479ZLZSAUhb&index=3](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3D10MxM7S5Qdg%26list%3DPLYEMlgrSG8zBT7oDFMLGvS479ZLZSAUhb%26index%3D3&sa=D&ust=1599081585509000&usg=AOvVaw1viqMiHXX6myfR06lpcqx4)


